lightning: add IMPORT INTO vs. TiDB Lightning (#17410)
pingcap/docs: tidb-lightning/import-into-vs-tidb-lightning.md

---
title: IMPORT INTO vs. TiDB Lightning
summary: Learn about the differences between `IMPORT INTO` and TiDB Lightning.
---

# IMPORT INTO vs. TiDB Lightning

Many users have provided feedback that the deployment, configuration, and maintenance of [TiDB Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md) are complex, especially in scenarios involving [parallel importing](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-distributed-import.md) of large datasets.

> Based on the feedback, TiDB has gradually integrated some functionalities of TiDB Lightning into the [`IMPORT INTO`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-import-into.md) SQL statement. You can directly import data by executing `IMPORT INTO`, thereby improving the efficiency of data import. In addition, `IMPORT INTO` supports some functionalities that TiDB Lightning does not, such as automatic distributed task scheduling and [TiDB Global Sort](/tidb-global-sort.md).

Reviewer: [import_into_link.patch.txt](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/files/15318483/import_into_link.patch.txt)

> Based on the feedback, TiDB has gradually integrated some functionalities of TiDB Lightning into the [`IMPORT INTO`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-import-into.md) SQL statement. You can directly import data by executing `IMPORT INTO`, thereby improving the efficiency of data import. In addition, `IMPORT INTO` supports some functionalities that TiDB Lightning does not, such as automatic distributed task scheduling and [TiDB Global Sort](/tidb-global-sort.md).

Reviewer: @hfxsd did you see my comment?

> Based on the feedback, TiDB has gradually integrated some functionalities of TiDB Lightning into the [`IMPORT INTO`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-import-into.md) SQL statement. You can directly import data by executing `IMPORT INTO`, thereby improving the efficiency of data import. In addition, `IMPORT INTO` supports some functionalities that TiDB Lightning does not, such as automatic distributed task scheduling and [TiDB Global Sort](/tidb-global-sort.md).

Author: Sorry! I didn't see the comment :( I'll correct it in another PR. Thank you!

`IMPORT INTO` is introduced in v7.2.0 and becomes generally available (GA) in v7.5.0. Once the `IMPORT INTO` capability can fully replace TiDB Lightning, TiDB Lightning will be deprecated. At that time, a notification will be provided in advance on the official website.

## Comparison between `IMPORT INTO` and TiDB Lightning

The following sections describe the differences between `IMPORT INTO` and TiDB Lightning in multiple dimensions.

### Deployment cost

#### `IMPORT INTO`

`IMPORT INTO` does not require separate deployment. You can run it directly on TiDB nodes, which eliminates additional deployment work.

#### TiDB Lightning

By contrast, TiDB Lightning requires [separate server deployment](/tidb-lightning/deploy-tidb-lightning.md).

### Resource utilization

#### `IMPORT INTO`

> The `IMPORT INTO` task and other business workloads can share TiDB resources or utilize them at different times to fully leverage the TiDB resources. To ensure stable operation of business workloads while maintaining the performance and stability of the `IMPORT INTO` task, you can specify [specific TiDB nodes](/system-variables.md#tidb_service_scope-new-in-v740) to be dedicated solely to `IMPORT INTO` for data import.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `IMPORT INTO` task and other business workloads can share TiDB resources or utilize them at different times to fully leverage the TiDB resources. To ensure stable operation of business workloads while maintaining the performance and stability of the `IMPORT INTO` task, you can specify [specific TiDB nodes](/system-variables.md#tidb_service_scope-new-in-v740) dedicated to `IMPORT INTO` for data import.
```

> When you use TiDB Global Sort, there is no need to mount large local disks. TiDB Global Sort can be done using S3. Once completed, you can delete the data to save storage costs.

Author: ```suggestion
When you use TiDB Global Sort, there is no need to mount large local disks. You can use TiDB Global Sort with Amazon S3. Once completed, you can delete the data to save storage costs.
```

#### TiDB Lightning

> You need separate servers to deploy and run TiDB Lightning. When there are no import tasks being executed, these machine resources remain idle. This idle time is even longer in scenarios where import tasks are executed periodically, resulting in a waste of resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You need separate servers to deploy and run TiDB Lightning. When there are no import tasks being executed, these resources remain idle. This idle time is even longer in scenarios where import tasks are executed periodically, resulting in a waste of resources.
```

If the volume of imported data is large, it is necessary to prepare large local disks to sort the data to be imported.

### Task configuration and integration

#### `IMPORT INTO`

You can directly write SQL statements to submit import tasks, which is easy to call and integrate.

#### TiDB Lightning

> By contrast, TiDB Lightning requires you to write [task configuration files](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md), which are complex and not easily called by third parties.

Author: ```suggestion
By contrast, TiDB Lightning requires you to write [task configuration files](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-configuration.md). These configuration files are complex and not easily called by third parties.
```

### Task scheduling

#### `IMPORT INTO`

> `IMPORT INTO` is naturally distributed. For example, when you import 40 TiB of source data files into one target table, after submitting the SQL statement, TiDB will automatically split it into multiple sub-tasks and schedule them to execute distributed import tasks on different TiDB nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`IMPORT INTO` supports distributed execution. For example, when you import 40 TiB of source data files into one target table, after submitting the SQL statement, TiDB will automatically split the import task into multiple sub-tasks and schedule different TiDB nodes to execute these sub-tasks.
```

#### TiDB Lightning

> Configuration for TiDB Lightning is complex, inefficient, and prone to errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By contrast, the configuration for TiDB Lightning is complex, inefficient, and prone to errors.
```

> For example, if you start 10 TiDB Lightning instances to import data in parallel, you need to write 10 TiDB Lightning configuration files, and configure each configuration file with the range of source files to be read by each TiDB Lightning instance. TiDB Lightning instance 1 reads the first 100 files, instance 2 reads the next 100 files, and so on.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if you start 10 TiDB Lightning instances to import data in parallel, you need to create 10 TiDB Lightning configuration files, and configure each configuration file with the range of source files to be read by each TiDB Lightning instance. For example, TiDB Lightning instance 1 reads the first 100 files, instance 2 reads the next 100 files, and so on.
```

> In addition, you need to configure the shared metadata table and other configuration information for these 10 TiDB Lightning instances.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, you need to configure the shared metadata table and other configuration information for these 10 TiDB Lightning instances, which is is complex.
```

### Global Sort vs. local sort

#### `IMPORT INTO`

> Based on TiDB Global Sort, tens of TiB of source data can be transmitted to multiple TiDB nodes, where the encoded data KV pairs and index KV pairs are transferred to S3 for global sorting before being written to TiKV.

Author: ```suggestion
Based on TiDB Global Sort, tens of TiB of source data can be transmitted to multiple TiDB nodes, where the encoded data KV pairs and index KV pairs are transferred to Amazon S3 for global sorting before being written to TiKV.
```

> Based on TiDB Global Sort, tens of TiB of source data can be transmitted to multiple TiDB nodes, where the encoded data KV pairs and index KV pairs are transferred to Amazon S3 for global sorting before being written to TiKV.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Based on TiDB Global Sort, tens of TiB of source data can be transmitted to multiple TiDB nodes, where the encoded data KV pairs and index KV pairs are transferred to Amazon S3 for global sorting before being ingested into TiKV.
```

Because it is globally sorted, data imported from various TiDB nodes into TiKV does not overlap, allowing it to be ingested directly into the RocksDB's L6 layer. This eliminates the need for TiKV to perform compaction operations, resulting in significant improvement in both write performance and stability of TiKV.

> After the import is completed, the data used for global sorting on S3 will be automatically deleted, saving storage costs.

Author: ```suggestion
After the import is completed, the data used for global sorting on Amazon S3 will be automatically deleted, saving storage costs.
```

#### TiDB Lightning

TiDB Lightning only supports local sort. For example, for tens of TiB of source data, if TiDB Lightning does not have large local disks configured, or if multiple TiDB Lightning instances are used for parallel import, each TiDB Lightning instance will only use local disks to sort the data responsible for the import. Due to the inability to perform global sorting, there will be overlap between the data imported into TiKV by multiple TiDB Lightning instances, especially in scenarios where index data is more prevalent, triggering TiKV to perform compaction operations. Bcause compaction is a very resource-intensive operation, it will lead to a decrease in TiKV's write performance and stability.

> In addition, after data import is complete, you still need to retain the local disks of TiDB Lightning for the next import. The cost is relatively higher compared to S3.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, after data import is complete, you still need to retain the local disks of TiDB Lightning for the next import. The cost is relatively higher compared to Amazon S3.
```

> In addition, after data import is complete, you still need to retain the local disks of TiDB Lightning for the next import. The cost is relatively higher compared to Amazon S3.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to continue importing data later, you will need to keep the TiDB Lightning machine and the disks on the machine for the next import. The cost of using TiDB Lightning is relatively high compared to `IMPORT INTO` using Amazon S3 on a pay-as-you-go basis.
```

### Performance

Currently, there are no performance test comparison results under equivalent test environments between `IMPORT INTO` and TiDB Lightning.

The `IMPORT INTO` performance test results with Global Sort are as follows:

> Data Sets:

Author: ```suggestion
Data sets:
```

> If you want to continue importing data later, you will need to keep the TiDB Lightning machine and the disks on the machine for the next import. The cost of using TiDB Lightning is relatively high, compared with `IMPORT INTO` using Amazon S3 on a pay-as-you-go basis.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want to continue importing data later, you will need to keep the TiDB Lightning machine and the disks on the machine for the next import. The cost of using preallocated disk is relatively high, compared with `IMPORT INTO` using Amazon S3 on a pay-as-you-go basis.
```

- 40 TiB of data (2.26 billion rows, single row size 19 KiB)
- 10 TiB of data (565 million rows, single row size 19 KiB)

AWS:

- Importing 40 TiB of data, 10 TiDB (16C32G) 20 TiKV nodes (16C27G), the average single TiDB node import speed is approximately 222 GiB/h.
- Importing 10 TiB of data, 5 TiDB (16C32G) 10 TiKV (16C27G), the average single TiDB node import speed is approximately 307 GiB/h.

### High availability

#### `IMPORT INTO`

After a TiDB node failure, tasks on that node are automatically transferred to the remaining TiDB nodes to continue running.

#### TiDB Lightning

> After a TiDB Lightning instance node failure, you need to perform manual recovery of tasks on a new node based on previously recorded checkpoints.

Author: ```suggestion
After a TiDB Lightning instance failure, you need to perform manual recovery of tasks on a new node based on previously recorded checkpoints.
```

### Scalability

#### `IMPORT INTO`

> Due to the use of Global Sort, data imported into TiKV does not overlap, resulting in better scalability compared to TiDB Lightning.

Author: ```suggestion
Due to the use of Global Sort, data imported into TiKV does not overlap, resulting in better scalability compared with TiDB Lightning.
```

#### TiDB Lightning

> Due to only supporting local sort, data imported into TiKV might overlap when adding TiDB Lightning instances, resulting in more compaction operations for TiKV, limiting scalability relative to `IMPORT INTO`.

Author: ```suggestion
Due to only supporting local sort, data imported into TiKV might overlap when adding TiDB Lightning instances, resulting in more compaction operations for TiKV and limiting scalability relative to `IMPORT INTO`.
```

## Functionalities not supported by `IMPORT INTO`

> Currently, `IMPORT INTO` still lacks some functionalities that cannot replace TiDB Lightning, such as:

Author: ```suggestion
Currently, `IMPORT INTO` still lacks some functionalities and cannot fully replace TiDB Lightning, such as:
```

> Currently, `IMPORT INTO` still lacks some functionalities and cannot fully replace TiDB Lightning, such as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, `IMPORT INTO` still lacks some functionalities and cannot fully replace TiDB Lightning in some scenarios, such as:
```

- Logical import

    Before importing data with `IMPORT INTO`, the target table must be empty. If you need to import data into a table that already contains data, it is recommended to use methods like [`LOAD DATA`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-load-data.md) or direct insertion. TiDB v8.0 supports [bulk DML](/system-variables.md#tidb_dml_type-new-in-v800) for executing large transactions.

- Conflict data handling

>     `IMPORT INTO` currently does not support conflict data handling. You need to define the table structure properly to ensure that the data to be imported does not conflict with primary keys (PK) or unique keys (UK). Otherwise, it might cause task failures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `IMPORT INTO` currently does not support conflict data handling. Before the data import, you need to define the table schema properly to ensure that the data to be imported does not conflict with primary keys (PK) or unique keys (UK). Otherwise, it might cause task failures.
```

- Importing data into multiple target tables

>     Currently, only one target table is allowed for the `IMPORT INTO` SQL statement. If you want to import data into multiple target tables, you need to submit multiple `IMPORT INTO` SQL statements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Currently, only one target table is allowed for one `IMPORT INTO` SQL statement. If you want to import data into multiple target tables, you need to submit multiple `IMPORT INTO` SQL statements.
```

In future versions, these functionalities will be supported by `IMPORT INTO`, along with additional enhancements to its capabilities, such as allowing modification of concurrency during task execution and adjusting throughput for writing to TiKV. This will make it more convenient for you to manage tasks.

## Summary

> Compared with TiDB Lightning, `IMPORT INTO` has greatly improved  in terms of deployment, resource utilization, task configuration convenience, ease of invocation and integration, automated distributed task scheduling and management, enhanced import stability based on Global Sort, high availability, and scalability. It is recommended that you use `IMPORT INTO` instead of TiDB Lightning in appropriate scenarios.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Compared with TiDB Lightning, `IMPORT INTO`can be directly executed on TiDB nodes, supports automated distributed task scheduling and [TiDB Global Sort](/tidb-global-sort.md), and offers significant improvements in deployment, resource utilization, task configuration convenience, ease of invocation and integration, high availability, and scalability. It is recommended that you consider using `IMPORT INTO` instead of TiDB Lightning in appropriate scenarios.
```
